❄️ End-to-End Data Engineering Challenge: Snowflake Medallion Architecture
This project demonstrates the implementation of a robust data architecture in Snowflake, transforming raw, inconsistent data from multiple sources into a high-quality analytical model (Gold) using the Medallion Architecture pattern.

🏗️ Phase 1: Environment Setup & Governance
To ensure an enterprise-grade environment, the project began by provisioning a Snowflake account and applying industry best practices for administration:

Object Hierarchy: Creation of a dedicated database and logical schemas for process isolation: BRONZE, SILVER, and GOLD.

RBAC (Role-Based Access Control): Configuration of system permissions to ensure each architectural layer is managed under the principle of least privilege.

📥 Phase 2: BRONZE Layer - The Multi-Format Ingestion Challenge
The Bronze layer was designed to ingest data from heterogeneous sources with significant structural inconsistencies. Key challenges were addressed across CSV, XML, JSON, and TXT files:

Format Validation: Custom FILE FORMATS were engineered to handle XML files with deep nesting and TXT files containing hidden semi-structured data.

Resilience & Data Quality: Technical "headaches" such as special characters, control rows (--- END OF FILE ---), and inconsistent delimiters were managed using defensive measures within the load formats.

Idempotent Ingestion: Implementation of a COPY INTO workflow (supporting Snowpipe logic) that prevents data duplication and ensures the process is restartable without corrupting the state of the Raw tables.


🧪 Phase 3: SILVER Layer - Transformation & Normalization
In this phase, "dirty" data was transformed into the Canonical Model. The primary focus was normalizing business complexity:

XML Parsing: Extensive use of the XMLGET function in combination with LATERAL FLATTEN to navigate deep hierarchies in transaction files, extracting critical attributes and handling nested tags.

Advanced Data Cleansing: * Data Quality Flags: Handling null values in critical fields (such as Amount) by tagging quality issues instead of simple record deletion.

Identity Normalization: Utilization of REGEXP_REPLACE to clean email addresses with syntax errors (duplicate dots and @ symbols) and COALESCE to standardize missing names and dates.

Deduplication: Application of window functions (ROW_NUMBER) to guarantee transaction uniqueness based on ingestion timestamps.

🛠️ Data Integrity & Missing Values Strategy
One of the most critical challenges in this project was handling records with missing primary identifiers (e.g., Transaction ID, Order ID). I implemented a Preservation Over Deletion strategy to ensure that sales performance metrics remained accurate while maintaining traceability.

1. Strategic Identity Generation (UUIDs)
For records where a Transaction ID was missing but a valid Amount was present, I opted not to drop the row. Deleting these would have resulted in an underestimation of total sales. Instead:

I generated a synthetic unique identifier using UUID_STRING() and prefixed it (e.g., TEMP-) to allow the business to identify these sales as "unlinked" but still account for their revenue.

2. Defensive Data Normalization
To ensure the Silver layer serves as a "Single Source of Truth," I used a combination of COALESCE, NULLIF, and TRY_CAST to handle empty strings and invalid formats. This approach prevents the downstream "N/A" or "Empty" clutter in reporting tools:

Orders & Customers: Used placeholders like 'UNKNOWN_ORDER' and 'UNKNOWN_CUSTID' to keep foreign key relationships intact without losing the context of the sale.

Date Standardization: Missing or malformed dates were defaulted to '1900-01-01'. This acts as a Data Quality Flag, allowing analysts to easily filter and evaluate records that require source-system correction.

Email & Product Metadata: Applied a fallback to 'invalid_email' or 'no description' to maintain schema consistency in the final Star Schema.

COALESCE(
    NULLIF(TRIM(trans_id), ''), 
    CONCAT('TEMP-', COALESCE(order_id, 'UNK'), '-', UUID_STRING())
) AS transaction_id

same as happend for amount I identify Amount as negative, instead of deleted or use ABS to convert as positive I decide to flag the data using a case statement because I need more bussiness insight in how to deal with negative value, but this approach at lest will notify the team something is going on with those values  


🏆 Phase 4: GOLD Layer - Business Value & Star Schema
The Gold layer represents the culmination of the process, proving that the Medallion structure is the most optimal approach for data scaling:

Star Schema Modeling: Processes were segmented into a central Fact Table (FACT_SALES) and descriptive Dimension Tables (DIM_CUSTOMERS, DIM_PRODUCTS), optimizing query efficiency.

Analytical Consumption: The final structure allows for instantaneous answers to complex business questions, such as sales analysis by channel, order status, and customer segment (VIP, Premier, Regular).

🛠️ Tech Stack
Platform: Snowflake (Cloud Data Warehouse)

Language: Snowflake SQL (UDFs, Window Functions, Regex, XML Parsing)

Architecture: Medallion (Bronze/Silver/Gold) / Star Schema

[def]: image.png